---
layout: post
title: "The Accuracy and Statistical Power of Average Marginal Effects"
categories: jekyll update
author: Tyson S. Barrett
comments: true
---

Below is a Prezi presentation I have prepared for a seminar about the accuracy and statistical power of **Average Marginal Effects** (AME's). It presents some simulations that I ran to assess the bias, the statistical power, and the CI coverage of AME's under various conditions. Although not directly related to using `R`, the simulations were performed in `R` and we introduce two packages that allow its use. Note that the two packages (e.g., `MarginalMediation` and `margins`) are only available on *GitHub* at the present. 

Ultimately, this is going to lead to **Marginal Mediation**. We are in the midst of developing a paper to introduce Marginal Mediation and to demonstrate its usefulness in several situations.

<iframe id="iframe_container" frameborder="0" webkitallowfullscreen="" mozallowfullscreen="" allowfullscreen="" width="725" height="500" src="https://prezi.com/embed/wubokjvtjgzu/?bgcolor=ffffff&amp;lock_to_path=1&amp;autoplay=0&amp;autohide_ctrls=0&amp;landing_data=bHVZZmNaNDBIWnNjdEVENDRhZDFNZGNIUE43MHdLNWpsdFJLb2ZHanI0OUhUNDh6VTJlNlVMclVGaWxpWm5nbkdnPT0&amp;landing_sign=D89xDkiTKfrBBlOcUW7BXrRmZY5MMnIlrMGUSCz0zGQ"></iframe>

I'll post again once we publish more information on average marginal effects and marginal mediation in the next few months. 

As a final note, a great paper presenting the basics of average marginal effects can be found [here](http://www.stata-journal.com/sjpdf.html?articlenum=st0086).


{% if page.comments %} 
<div id="disqus_thread"></div>
<script>
    /**
     *  RECOMMENDED CONFIGURATION VARIABLES: EDIT AND UNCOMMENT THE SECTION BELOW TO INSERT DYNAMIC VALUES FROM YOUR PLATFORM OR CMS.
     *  LEARN WHY DEFINING THESE VARIABLES IS IMPORTANT: https://disqus.com/admin/universalcode/#configuration-variables
     */
    /*
    var disqus_config = function () {
        this.page.url = page.url;  // Replace PAGE_URL with your page's canonical URL variable
        this.page.identifier = page.identifer; // Replace PAGE_IDENTIFIER with your page's unique identifier variable
    };
    */
    (function() {  // DON'T EDIT BELOW THIS LINE
        var d = document, s = d.createElement('script');
        
        s.src = '//tysonstanley.disqus.com/embed.js';
        
        s.setAttribute('data-timestamp', +new Date());
        (d.head || d.body).appendChild(s);
    })();
</script>
<noscript>Please enable JavaScript to view the <a href="https://disqus.com/?ref_noscript" rel="nofollow">comments powered by Disqus.</a></noscript>
{% endif %}


