---
layout: post
title: "Leaflet of Violent Crime Rates by State"
categories: jekyll update
author: Tyson S. Barrett
comments: true
---

The map below is an example of using the `leaflet` `R` package to demonstrate statistics about a location (in this example, by state). There are a few great tutorials on `leaflet` and creating something useful and beautiful is fairly simple. I've adapted the code from [https://rstudio.github.io/leaflet/choropleths.html](https://rstudio.github.io/leaflet/choropleths.html) for the mapping. The `R` code to create it is below the figure.

For this map, the **violent crime rate** per 100,000 individuals by state in 2015 is highlighted. Several aspects are nice: we combined our data with the mapping features of *MapBox*, we can see the statistics by having the mouse over the map, and it looks aesthetically nice.

<iframe src="//rstudio-pubs-static.s3.amazonaws.com/253525_f1581dcd3a3f40dcacae8ea196b1b2ff.html" style="border: none; width: 700px; height: 500px"></iframe>


{% highlight r %}
library(leaflet)
library(sp)
library(tidyverse)

## The geo data for the states
## from http://eric.clst.org/Stuff/USGeoJSON
states <- geojsonio::geojson_read("us-states.geojson", what = "sp")

## Crime statistics from the FBI
## https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2015/crime-in-the-u.s.-2015/tables/table-5
crimes <- read.csv("FBI_crime.csv") %>%
  filter(Area == "State Total") %>%
  filter(type == "Rate per 100,000 inhabitants") %>%
  mutate(State = toupper(State)) %>%
  select(State, violent, murder) %>%
  mutate(State = gsub("[0-9]", "", State)) %>%
  data.frame

## Combine crime stats with the geo data
states2 = states
states2@data = states@data %>%
  mutate(State = toupper(NAME)) %>%
  left_join(crimes, by = "State") %>%
  data.frame

## The map
bins <- c(seq(100,800,100))
pal <- colorBin("YlOrRd", domain = states2$violent, bins = bins)

labels <- sprintf(
  "<strong>%s</strong><br/>%g violent crimes per\n100,000 individuals",
  states2$State, states2$violent
) %>% lapply(htmltools::HTML)

leaflet(states2) %>%
  setView(-96, 37.8, 4) %>%
  addProviderTiles(provider = "MapBox", options = providerTileOptions(
    id = "mapbox.light",
    accessToken = 'Your Own Token')) %>%
  addPolygons(
    fillColor = ~pal(violent),
    weight = 2,
    opacity = 1,
    color = "white",
    dashArray = "3",
    fillOpacity = 0.7,
    highlight = highlightOptions(
      weight = 5,
      color = "#666",
      dashArray = "",
      fillOpacity = 0.7,
      bringToFront = TRUE),
    label = labels,
    labelOptions = labelOptions(
      style = list("font-weight" = "normal", padding = "3px 8px"),
      textsize = "15px",
      direction = "auto")) %>%
  addLegend(pal = pal, 
            values = ~violent, 
            opacity = 0.7, 
            title = "Violent Crimes per 100,000",
            position = "bottomright")
{% endhighlight %}


{% if page.comments %} 
<div id="disqus_thread"></div>
<script>
    /**
     *  RECOMMENDED CONFIGURATION VARIABLES: EDIT AND UNCOMMENT THE SECTION BELOW TO INSERT DYNAMIC VALUES FROM YOUR PLATFORM OR CMS.
     *  LEARN WHY DEFINING THESE VARIABLES IS IMPORTANT: https://disqus.com/admin/universalcode/#configuration-variables
     */
    /*
    var disqus_config = function () {
        this.page.url = page.url;  // Replace PAGE_URL with your page's canonical URL variable
        this.page.identifier = page.identifer; // Replace PAGE_IDENTIFIER with your page's unique identifier variable
    };
    */
    (function() {  // DON'T EDIT BELOW THIS LINE
        var d = document, s = d.createElement('script');
        
        s.src = '//tysonstanley.disqus.com/embed.js';
        
        s.setAttribute('data-timestamp', +new Date());
        (d.head || d.body).appendChild(s);
    })();
</script>
<noscript>Please enable JavaScript to view the <a href="https://disqus.com/?ref_noscript" rel="nofollow">comments powered by Disqus.</a></noscript>
{% endif %}


