---
layout: post
title:  "Announcing Furniture Version 1.5.0"
categories: jekyll update
author: Tyson S. Barrett
comments: true
---
Below is the news release from `furniture` version 1.5.0.

### Version 1.5.0

`table1()` now has the ability to apply any function to numeric variables that the user supplies (all functions that work with `tapply()` should work with `table1()`. Other than that, the changes are mainly internal changes in `table1()` that have bearing on a few arguments.

1. If no variables are named, then all variables are summarized in the `data.frame` (the `all` argument is no longer used).
2. Piping is automatically detected so `piping` is not longer used as an argument.
3. `rounding` is no longer used given a user can define their own function with their own rounding limits.
4. `test_type` is no longer an argument. The functionality of the `"or"` option was just not being used and was too cumbersome.
5. `format_output`, `condense` and `simple` are combined into one `type` argument (defaults are still the same).
6. `output_type` is now just `output`.

Finally, `tableM()` was removed from the package. It is easily adopted by `table1()` with small modifications to the `splitby` variable. I apologize for any inconvenience these changes cause. However, I believe it is best in the long run and will make using and upgrading the package much easier.

As an aside, most of these changes are due to a manuscript in review about the package. Several beneficial suggestions were made and so we made those changes at the cost of a small headache at first.

Thanks!



{% if page.comments %} 
<div id="disqus_thread"></div>
<script>
    /**
     *  RECOMMENDED CONFIGURATION VARIABLES: EDIT AND UNCOMMENT THE SECTION BELOW TO INSERT DYNAMIC VALUES FROM YOUR PLATFORM OR CMS.
     *  LEARN WHY DEFINING THESE VARIABLES IS IMPORTANT: https://disqus.com/admin/universalcode/#configuration-variables
     */
    /*
    var disqus_config = function () {
        this.page.url = page.url;  // Replace PAGE_URL with your page's canonical URL variable
        this.page.identifier = page.identifer; // Replace PAGE_IDENTIFIER with your page's unique identifier variable
    };
    */
    (function() {  // DON'T EDIT BELOW THIS LINE
        var d = document, s = d.createElement('script');
        
        s.src = '//tysonstanley.disqus.com/embed.js';
        
        s.setAttribute('data-timestamp', +new Date());
        (d.head || d.body).appendChild(s);
    })();
</script>
<noscript>Please enable JavaScript to view the <a href="https://disqus.com/?ref_noscript" rel="nofollow">comments powered by Disqus.</a></noscript>
{% endif %}